initial set reconciliation protocol (#159)
nuts-foundation/nuts-specification: rfc/rfc017-distributed-network-grpc-v2.md

## 2. Terminology
 
* **DAG** \(Directed Acyclic Graph\): graph formed of all transactions. It provides casual ordering for transactions and means to efficiently compare the local DAG with those of peers. See [RFC004](rfc004-verifiable-transactional-graph.md) for details.

> * **Invertible Bloom Lookup Table (IBLT)**: A bloom filter where instead of just a 0 or 1, a count, key_sum and hash_sum is stored per bucket. Original paper: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1101.2245 or https://www.ics.uci.edu/~eppstein/pubs/EppGooUye-SIGCOMM-11.pdf.

Reviewer: makes these proper links

> * **Lamport Clock (LC)**: Monotonically increasing clock as defined in [RFC016](rfc016-lamport-clock.md).

Author: `logical clock` then

## 4. Set reconciliation protocol

### 4.1 Data requirements

The protocol requires an XOR value and IBLT structure to be sent in a message. 
These are to be calculated over different transaction ranges based on LC value.
Both data structures have associative properties allowing for optimized data storage.

#### 4.1.1 XOR

The exclusive-or (XOR) value is calculated over all transactions reference hashes within a range.
The length of the XOR value is therefore the same as the transaction reference length (SHA256: 32 bytes).
The XOR value is used to quickly determine if two nodes have processed the exact same set of transactions.

#### 4.1.2 Invertible Bloom Lookup Table

The IBLT is a data structure capable of finding differences in sets.
The performance of this data structure is not impacted by the number of entries, but only by the size of the set difference.
This allows two nodes to compare the entire set of transactions with a relative small data structure.

An IBLT has several parameters that define its characteristics. When comparing two IBLTs, these parameters MUST be the same.
An overview of the parameters:

> * **#buckets**: defines the size of the IBLT, much like the size of a bloom filter. The larger the size, the bigger the set difference can be. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **buckets**: defines the size of the IBLT, much like the size of a bloom filter. The larger the size, the bigger the set difference can be. 
```

> * **Hk**: each key is hashed to select the buckets the key is inserted to. The hash function is applied on the previous output to create extra hash values. This continues until k different values are found. The hash function, its seed and the value for k MUST all be the same for the entire network.

Reviewer 2: detail: the hashing function produces numbers much larger than the number of buckets. Since 2 different hashes can map to the same bucket, we need to keep hashing until we find k different buckets not values.

> * **Hk**: each key is hashed to select the buckets the key is inserted to. The hash function is applied on the previous output to create extra hash values. This continues until k different values are found. The hash function, its seed and the value for k MUST all be the same for the entire network.

Author: correct, as described in the paper.
If a hash function is uniform, doesn't that automatically mean that hashing twice is uniform?

> * **Hk**: each key is hashed to select the buckets the key is inserted to. The hash function is applied on the previous output to create extra hash values. This continues until k different values are found. The hash function, its seed and the value for k MUST all be the same for the entire network.

Reviewer 2: Yes, it should be uniform on random inputs. I just don't know if the hash-RNG provides any guarantees about how many numbers are generated before it repeats itself. This period could provide less than the k buckets needed to put the key/TxRef in the IBLT.

* **Hc**: each key is hashed to a checksum which is used to validate the inserted key during the deconstruction phase. 

> * **data types**: the data types for *count*, *val_sum* and *hash_sum* MUST match ((un)signed, byte-size).

Author: it's a summary of IBLT characteristics that MUST be the same when comparing two IBLTs

The following parameters are used:

* **buckets**: 1024
* **Hc**: murmur3, 4 bytes, seed: 0x00
* **Hk**: murmur3, 4 bytes, seed: 0x01, k = 5 
* **key sum size**: 32 bytes
* **bucket count field**: 4 bytes

### 4.1.3 IBLT page size

Calculating an IBLT is relatively cheap, but it grows linearly with the number of transactions. This would harm performance of larger networks.
The immutable nature of transactions make it possible to store intermediate IBLTs and use those as an optimization.
The LC range parameters of the protocol should be adjusted accordingly to optimize use of these intermediate IBLTs.
Therefore, they should not be chosen freely.

Any LC value used in the protocol MUST be a multiple of 512 (minus 1, because the LC is 0 based). 
The use of inclusive or exclusive range parameters must make sure that `end-start` is a multiple of 512.

> In the context of an IBLT this size will be referred to as the `IBLT page size`.

Author: as addition or replacement?

> In the context of an IBLT this size will be referred to as the `IBLT page size`.

Reviewer 2: I find it easier to read it like this then having to find the details in the text. But that is a personal preference, so adding this provides options for different types of readers.

### 4.2 Operation

All messages and values mentioned in this chapter are scoped to a single connection between two nodes.

The protocol generally operates as follows:

1. The local node broadcasts at a set interval:
    * XOR of all known transaction references.
    * Highest Lamport Clock value over all transactions (LC).
    
2. When receiving a peer's broadcast, compare the XOR value:
    * When the XOR is the same: no action required.
    * When different, send a message containing

>       * If the LC is incompatible with its own registration: no action required.

Author: removed it, was out of place

>       * the IBLT that includes the Lamport Clock range of 0-LC

Author: changed order of items so it comes after the notion of ALice's LC

      * the peer LC value

>       * the own highest Lamport Clock value

Author: I'll use Alice and Bob

3. When receiving the message, the local node subtracts the given IBLT from its own IBLT for the given range:

>    * If not deconstructable, go to 1 and send values based on a smaller Lamport Clock value.

Author: lower sounds better

   * If deconstructable, send a request for missing transactions
   * If the peers highest Lamport Clock value is higher that the LC value sent in 1, then request transactions by Lamport Clock value:
     * Lamport Clock start value.

>      * Lamport Clock end value.

Author: Yes, when you're missing 1024 transactions, you'll never be able to do this via IBLT, the only option left would be to request a range. If you start with LC=0, Bob will send its IBLT for 0-512 and its LC of 2048. Alice will not be able to deconstruct Bob's IBLT (range had 1024 TXs), then Alice can only fall back on a range query.

The ignore part has been removed for now.

4. When receiving a request for transactions, respond with a message including the requested transactions.

5. After adding a peer's transaction to the DAG \(making sure its cryptographic signature is valid\), query the payload if it's missing.

The node MUST make sure to only add transactions of which all previous transactions are present. The node MUST also add the transaction atomically.

> If one transaction is invalid, ignore the entire message.

Author: I'll remove it for now. It's part of another feature.

> The sections below specify the details of the protocol operation and maps it to the gRPC messages. See the section "Protobuf Definition" for a full specification of the protobuf/gRPC contract.

Author: Not there yet, different PR

### 4.2.1 Broadcasting

The local node's DAG state MUST be broadcast at an interval using the `AdvertState` message, by default every 2 seconds. The interval MAY be adjusted by the node operator but MUST conform to the limits \(min/max interval\) defined by the network. It is advised to keep it relatively short because it directly influences the speed by which new transactions are retrieved.

The `AdvertState` message contains a `XOR` value, a `LC` value and a `token`. The `token` is scoped to a connection and is required in the response from the peer.

> A node is free to choose how the `token` is created as long as it's able to satisfy the requirements of the next paragraph.

Author: should be 4.2.3

It MUST be valid for at least 10 seconds.

### 4.2.2 IBLT response

When a peer receives an `AdvertState` message and the `XOR` differs, it SHOULD respond with a `TransactionSet` message.
The upper bound of the response IBLT MUST be the equal to `512*ceil(LC/512)` where `LC` is the value from the `AdvertState` message and `ceil` is a function that rounds a double up to the nearest integer.

> This upper bound is exclusive, the lower bound is inclusive and always 0.

Author: It MUST always start at zero, since new TXs in higher ranges may depend on TXs in the lower ranges.

Other rules require ordering: did updates, vc issuance so that would prevent behaving nodes from adding everything to the root. New DIDs can all be added to the root, but given this protocol, what would be the harm? (Massive branching no longer is a problem because we're not publishing heads anymore)

> This upper bound is exclusive, the lower bound is inclusive and always 0.

Reviewer 2: If a node gets `infected` with the collision pair, it cannot reconcile new transactions from a peer that has not been infected. This slows down propagation of new Txs throughout the network until everyone is infected.

The current protocol only describes a way to detect that the nodes are not in sync, followed by set-reconciliation. I propose we broadcast TxRefs of recently received Txs also. This could be as a separate message, or add a []TxRef to the `AdvertState`. The peer can check if it is missing any of these and request them with a `TransactionListQuery`. This should resolve the differences in most cases and reduce the need for 'heavier' set-reconciliation.

> Next to the IBLT data, the `TransactionSet` message contains the original `LC` value as `LC_req`, a new `LC` value indicating the highest LC value the peer has and the `token` value from the `AdvertState` message.

Author: any ideas?

> Next to the IBLT data, the `TransactionSet` message contains the original `LC` value as `LC_req`, a new `LC` value indicating the highest LC value the peer has and the `token` value from the `AdvertState` message.

Reviewer 2: `LC` in `AdvertState` can be `LC_req` as well. 
If the IBLT cannot be decoded, a new `AdvertState` with lower `LC` will be send. This is not a _advert_ of the nodes LC, but a request for which LC range the peer should send an IBLT.

### 4.2.3 Transaction List Query

For every `TransactionSet` message a node receives, it MUST check the `token` value in the message and compare it to its own administration.
If the `token` doesn't exist or if the `LC_req` value doesn't match, the node MUST ignore the message.

The IBLT in the `TransactionSet` message contains every transaction of the peer in the LC range of `0-LC_req`. The node MUST lookup/compute the IBLT for this range and subtract it from the IBLT of the peer. Deconstruction of the resulting IBLT will list the transaction refs the peer has and the local node misses. 

> These transactions MUST be queried by using the `TransactionListQuery` message. It contains all missing transaction references. An IBLT deconstruction with the current parameters will not be able to yield anything larger than ~750 values. This will easily fit into a single message given the current maximum message size.

Author: I'll just remove it since it doesn't add anything.

The message MUST contain a `token` that is to be used in the response.

> If the deconstruction fails, the local node sends a new `AdvertState` message. The `LC` value MUST be `512*floor((LC_req-1)/512)` where `floor` is a function that rounds a double down to the nearest integer. 

Author: the `-1` makes sure the floor func works.
If it was 1024, it becomes 1023/512 => 1.99 => 1
This will also works for any arbitrary initial value (highes LC value)

> The `XOR` value MUST be calculated over the transaction references in the range starting with 0 and ending with the new `LC` value.

Author: Change point 2 in 4.2:
`* When the XOR is the same and the LC value equals BOB's highest Lamport Clock value: no action required.`

> ### 4.2.4 Transaction Range Query

Author: The idea fow now is that new nodes will use the same protocol, which will result in a single range query from 0-end.

> ### 4.2.4 Transaction Range Query

Author: I did forget to add what to send as XOR/IBLT when no transactions are available!

This is only needed if the `LC` value of the `TransactionSet` message is equal or larger than `512*ceil(LC_req/512)`. 
This means the peer has additional transactions outside the IBLT range.
The `TransactionRangeQuery` message contains a `begin` and `end` parameter indicating a request for transactions which LC value is between those parameters.
The `begin` MUST be set to `512*ceil(LC_req/512)` and the end MUST be set to `LC`. Both are inclusive.
The message MUST contain a `token` that is to be used in the response.

### 4.2.5 Transaction List

The `TransactionList` message contains a list of transactions and the `token` from either the `TransactionListQuery` or `TransactionRangeQuery`.
Each transaction in the message MUST relate to the original request. Transactions that resulted from a `TransactionListQuery` MUST have been present in that message.
Transactions that resulted from a `TransactionRangeQuery` MUST have an LC value that is within the requested range.
If this is not true, the entire message MUST be ignored.
A `TransactionList` message MAY be broken up into smaller messages, each message should confirm to these rules. Each part MUST also use the same `token`.

> All transactions in the `TransactionList` message MUST be sorted by LC value (lowest first).

Author: from https://grpc.io/docs/what-is-grpc/core-concepts/

_Bidirectional streaming RPCs where both sides send a sequence of messages using a read-write stream. The two streams operate independently, so clients and servers can read and write in whatever order they like: for example, the server could wait to receive all the client messages before writing its responses, or it could alternately read a message then write a message, or some other combination of reads and writes. The order of messages in each stream is preserved._

## X. Private Transactions

## Appendix A: Design decisions

### A.1 IBLT parameters

For a small network, 1024 buckets and 5 hashes is quite heavy. 
For a nation-wide network this would be reasonable.
The reason for these parameters is the chance of a collision: a different transaction that results in the exact same buckets as another transaction.
If there's a collision, it would not be possible to deconstruct an IBLT since there'll be too many buckets that still have a count of 2.
In the protocol this would mean an entire range of transactions would have to be sent.
When this happens randomly, it wouldn't be such a problem, but it's also an attack vector.

> An attacker could craft pairs of transactions that would trigger other nodes into requesting large amounts of transactions. 

Author: It'll only block direct IBLT comparison and will fall back on sending the entire page. So nothing blocking, just slower. On the other hand, adding the 6th hash is not a very big problem.

1. Resolve peer's node DID to its corresponding DID document.
2. Assert that one of the `NutsComm` endpoint's host matches (one of) the `dNSName` SANs in the peer's TLS client certificate.

## 4. Set reconciliation protocol

### 4.1 Data requirements

The protocol requires an XOR value and IBLT structure to be sent in a message. 
These are to be calculated over different transaction ranges based on LC value.

> Both data structures have associative properties allowing for optimized data storage.

Author: I'll remove it and let it up to the reader to apply a binary tree type of storage ;)

#### 4.1.1 XOR

The exclusive-or (XOR) value is calculated over all transactions reference within a range.
The length of the XOR value is therefore the same as the transaction reference length (SHA256: 32 bytes).
The XOR value is used to quickly determine if two nodes have processed the exact same set of transactions.

#### 4.1.2 Invertible Bloom Lookup Table

The IBLT is a data structure capable of finding differences between sets.
The performance of this data structure is not impacted by the number of entries, but only by the size of the set difference.
This allows two nodes to compare the entire set of transactions with a relative small data structure.

An IBLT has several parameters that define its characteristics. When comparing two IBLTs, these parameters MUST be the same.
An overview of the parameters:

* **buckets**: defines the size of the IBLT, much like the size of a bloom filter. The larger the size, the bigger the set difference can be. 

> * **Hk**: each key is hashed to select the buckets the key is inserted to. The hash function is applied on the previous output to create extra hash values. This continues until k different values are found. The hash function, its seed and the value for k MUST all be the same for the entire network.

Author: changed to `applied recursively`

> * **Hc**: each key is hashed to a checksum which is used to validate the inserted key during the deconstruction phase.

Reviewer: "deconstruction" is not defined (no idea how it works/what it is), not by the linked papers

Author: It's called decoding there. Changed it to that.

> * **Hc**: each key is hashed to a checksum which is used to validate the inserted key during the deconstruction phase.

Author: copied 2 of the 3 requirements for Hk

* **data types**: the data types for *count*, *val_sum* and *hash_sum* MUST match ((un)signed, byte-size).

The following parameters are used:

* **buckets**: 1024
* **Hc**: [murmur3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MurmurHash), 8 bytes, seed: 0x00
* **Hk**: murmur3, 4 bytes, seed: 0x01, k = 6 

> * **key sum size**: 32 bytes

Author: `val_sum` field size and `count` field size. Under `data_types`

* **bucket count field**: 4 bytes

See Appendix A.1 for an explanation.

### 4.1.3 IBLT page size

Calculating an IBLT is relatively cheap, but it grows linearly with the number of transactions. This would harm performance of larger networks.
The immutable nature of transactions make it possible to store intermediate IBLTs and use those as an optimization.
The LC range parameters of the protocol should be adjusted accordingly to optimize use of these intermediate IBLTs.
Therefore, they should not be chosen freely.

> Any LC value used in the protocol MUST be a multiple of 512 (minus 1, because the LC is 0 based). 

Reviewer: This reads like a TXs LC can only be 0, 521, 1042, etc. BUt I'm sure that's not what you mean?

Author: The LC value in the message, not on the TX

The use of inclusive or exclusive range parameters must make sure that `end-start` is a multiple of 512.
In the context of an IBLT this size will be referred to as the `IBLT page size` or `PSIZE` for short.

### 4.2 Operation

All messages and values mentioned in this chapter are scoped to a single connection between two nodes.
*Alice* and *Bob* are used to represent two nodes connected to each other.

The protocol generally operates as follows:

1. Alice broadcasts at a set interval (§4.2.1):
    * XOR of all known transaction references.
    * Highest Lamport Clock value over all transactions (LC).
    
2. When receiving Alice's broadcast, Bob compares the XOR value from Alice with its own (§4.2.2):
    * When the XOR is the same and the LC value equals BOB's highest Lamport Clock value: no action required.
    * When different, send a message containing:
      * LC value sent by Alice

>       * the IBLT that includes the Lamport Clock range of 0-LC

Reviewer: in other words, Bob sends his IBLT spanning his DAG from `LC=0` to `LC=LC(Alice)`?

      * Bob's highest Lamport Clock value

3. When receiving the message, Alice subtracts Bob's IBLT from her own IBLT for the given range (§4.2.3):

>    * If not deconstructable, go to 1 and send values based on a lower Lamport Clock value.

Reviewer: "a lower value" is vague for a spec. TODO?

Author: introduced the concept of a page in the spec (not in the message), so we can use the notion of a "previous page"

   * If deconstructable, send a request for missing transactions

>    * If Bob's highest Lamport Clock value is higher that the LC value sent in 1, then request transactions by Lamport Clock value:

Reviewer: that -> than

     * Lamport Clock start value.
     * Lamport Clock end value.

4. When receiving a request for transactions, Bob responds with a message including the requested transactions (§4.2.4 and §4.2.5).

> 5. After adding Bob's transactions to the DAG \(making sure its cryptographic signature is valid\), query the payload if it's missing.

Reviewer: not just signatures, but all validations. Also we're going atomic, aren't we?

Author: That has been intentionally left out of this PR

> A node MUST make sure to only add transactions of which all previous transactions are present.

Reviewer: Does the protocol above assure that transactions are sync'd in order?

Author: That requirement has been added to 4.2.5 Transaction List message

The sections below specify the details of the protocol operation and maps it to the gRPC messages. See the section "Protobuf Definition" for a full specification of the protobuf/gRPC contract.

### 4.2.1 Broadcasting

> The local node's DAG state MUST be broadcast at an interval using the `AdvertState` message, by default every 2 seconds. The interval MAY be adjusted by the node operator but MUST conform to the limits \(min/max interval\) defined by the network. It is advised to keep it relatively short because it directly influences the speed by which new transactions are retrieved.

Reviewer: I'd call the message `State`. Or something else, at least without the "Advert" part, since it describes the action (adverting), which just means it is a broadcast to all peers. So irrelevant for the message name, and it might also be triggered by the request from the peer for a specific range?

> The local node's DAG state MUST be broadcast at an interval using the `AdvertState` message, by default every 2 seconds. The interval MAY be adjusted by the node operator but MUST conform to the limits \(min/max interval\) defined by the network. It is advised to keep it relatively short because it directly influences the speed by which new transactions are retrieved.

Reviewer: every 2 seconds, given 40k bytes = 40000/1024*30/1024 = 1,44mb per minute. Sounds OK-ish?

Although, that's for every peer. So for 10 peers that's 14,4mb. Hopefully our PIs don't blow up.

Author: Talked it over with @gerardsn , will add a Gossip message as well. This state message can then be used less often and only when the network is calm.

> The `AdvertState` message contains a `XOR` value, an `LC` value and a `token`. The `token` is scoped to a connection and is required in the response from the peer.

Reviewer: We could introduce `token` as v2 message header, applied to all query-response messages. Sounds like a "conversation ID"?

Author: It is, could be part of another PR when another message type requires it?

Reviewer: Moving it would break the v1 version of the protocol though (unless you keep it at both message and envelope level)

The `LC` value MUST equals the highest Lamport Clock value of all transaction references included in the `XOR` calculation.
If no transactions are present, an all-zero `XOR` and `LC` of 0 is sent.
A node is free to choose how the `token` is created as long as it's able to satisfy the requirements of §4.2.3.

> It MUST be valid for at least 10 seconds.

Reviewer: what if it is received and it doesn't match?

Author: stated in 4.2.3
when upgraded to conversation ID, it'll be in its own chapter.

### 4.2.2 IBLT response

When a peer receives an `AdvertState` message and the `XOR` differs, it SHOULD respond with a `TransactionSet` message.

> The upper bound of the response IBLT MUST be the equal to `PSIZE*ceil(LC/PSIZE)` where `LC` is the value from the `AdvertState` message and `ceil` is a function that rounds a double up to the nearest integer.

Reviewer: what are bounds of the IBLT?

Author: refrased it

If `LC` equals zero, `PSIZE` is used.

> This upper bound is exclusive, the lower bound is inclusive and always 0.

Reviewer: 0, meaning from DAG root?

Author: rephrased it using pages.

> Next to the IBLT data, the `TransactionSet` message MUST contain the original `LC` value as `LC_req`, a new `LC` value indicating the highest LC value from the peer and the `token` value from the `AdvertState` message.

Reviewer: since we're using protobuf, there's not really a need to shorten field names imo

### 4.2.3 Transaction List Query

For every `TransactionSet` message a node receives, it MUST check the `token` value in the message and compare it to its own administration.
If the `token` doesn't exist or if the `LC_req` value doesn't match, the node MUST ignore the message.

The IBLT in the `TransactionSet` message contains every transaction of the peer in the LC range of `0-LC_req`. The node MUST lookup/compute the IBLT for this range and subtract it from the IBLT of the peer. Deconstruction of the resulting IBLT will list the transaction refs the peer has and the local node misses. 

> These transactions MUST be queried by using the `TransactionListQuery` message. It contains all missing transaction references.

Reviewer: if we don't allow adding TXs with missing prevs to the DAG, you'll almost never query "random" TXs (only in case of a branch), so wouldn't range queries suffice?

Author: If someone creates a branch at LC=0 while your LC is at 391867540913, then you have a big problem if your only tool is the range query. It could also have created a TX with prevs=[0, 391867540913]. With the IBLT you can exactly query those 2 TXs, with ranges not so much....

The message MUST contain a `token` that is to be used in the response.

If the deconstruction fails, the local node sends a new `AdvertState` message. The `LC` value MUST be `PSIZE*floor((LC_req-1)/PSIZE)` where `floor` is a function that rounds a double down to the nearest integer. 

> The `XOR` value MUST be calculated over the transaction references in the range starting with 0 and ending with the new `LC` value.

Reviewer: wouldn't it be pretty expensive to recalculate the XOR over a billion TXs?

Author: the implementation should store intermediate results in a binary tree. The IBLTs will have a maximum overhead of 40k per 512 transactions.

### 4.2.4 Transaction Range Query

If the IBLT from a `TransactionSet` message could be deconstructed, the local node MAY also send a `TransactionRangeQuery` message.
This is only needed if the `LC` value of the `TransactionSet` message is equal or larger than `PSIZE*ceil(LC_req/PSIZE)`. 
This means the peer has additional transactions outside the IBLT range.

> The `TransactionRangeQuery` message contains a `begin` and `end` parameter indicating a request for transactions which LC value is between those parameters.

Reviewer: earlier we had `start` and `end` (contraty to `begin`)

> The `begin` MUST be set to `PSIZE*ceil(LC_req/PSIZE)` and the end MUST be set to `LC`. Both are inclusive.

Reviewer: kinda confusing that `end` is inclusive here, and non-inclusive in the earlier IBLT range?

Author: fixed

If this is not true, the entire message MUST be ignored.
A `TransactionList` message MAY be broken up into smaller messages, each message should confirm to these rules. Each part MUST also use the same `token`.
All transactions in the `TransactionList` message MUST be sorted by LC value (lowest first).

## X. Private Transactions

## Appendix A: Design decisions

### A.1 IBLT parameters

For a small network, 1024 buckets and 6 hashes is quite heavy. 
For a nation-wide network this would be reasonable.
These parameters are chosen to reduce the chance of a collision: two different transactions that are hashed into the exact same buckets.
If there is a collision in the _set difference_, it is not be possible to deconstruct an IBLT.
In the protocol described here, this would mean that an entire range of transactions would have to be sent.
When this happens randomly, it wouldn't be such a problem, but it's also an attack vector.
An attacker could craft pairs of transactions that would trigger other nodes into requesting large amounts of transactions. 
This type of attack is called the [birthday attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birthday_attack).

> The only way to protect against this type of attack is to make the set large enough that the cost to the attacker would become to big.

Reviewer: too high

> For an IBLT with 64 buckets and 4 hashes, the change for a collision is 50% after adding ~5000 keys.

Reviewer: change -> chance

This would be trivial for current computers.
Expanding this to 1024 buckets and 6 hashes, reaching a 50% chance for a collision is only achieved after adding more than a billion keys.
This is still not much, but the keys used for the collision have to be created by real signed transactions.

> Even on modern hardware, this could take an hour.

Reviewer: Are we quantum-proof? :-p

Author: The idea is to make the cost high enough and the impact low enough. The network will also be able to sync those transactions in a second. The cost of using a quantum computer will be high enough for the next 10 years or so?

*Alice* and *Bob* are used to represent two nodes connected to each other.

The protocol generally operates as follows:

1. Alice broadcasts at a set interval (§4.2.1):
    * XOR of all known transaction references.
    * Highest Lamport Clock value over all transactions (LC).
    
2. When receiving Alice's broadcast, Bob compares the XOR value from Alice with its own (§4.2.2):
    * When the XOR is the same and the LC value equals BOB's highest Lamport Clock value: no action required.
    * When different, send a message containing:
      * LC value sent by Alice
      * the IBLT that includes the Lamport Clock range of 0-LC(Alice)
      * Bob's highest Lamport Clock value

3. When receiving the message, Alice subtracts Bob's IBLT from her own IBLT for the given range (§4.2.3):
   * If not decodable, go to 1 and send values based on the previous page.
   * If decodable, send a request for missing transactions
   * If Bob's highest Lamport Clock value is higher than the LC value sent in 1, then request transactions by Lamport Clock value:
     * Lamport Clock start value.
     * Lamport Clock end value.

> 4. When receiving a request for transactions, Bob responds with a message including the requested transactions (§4.2.4 and §4.2.5).

Reviewer 2: shouldn't §4.2.4 map to the last bullet of point 3?

The `LC` value MUST equals the highest Lamport Clock value of all transaction references included in the `XOR` calculation.
If no transactions are present, an all-zero `XOR` and `LC` of 0 is sent.
A node is free to choose how the `token` is created as long as it's able to satisfy the requirements of §4.2.3.
It MUST be valid for at least 10 seconds.

#### 4.2.2 IBLT response

When a peer receives an `State` message and the `XOR` differs, it SHOULD respond with a `TransactionSet` message.
The sent `LC` value falls within the bounds of a page.
The response IBLT MUST be calculated over the transactions leading up to and including that page.
Next to the IBLT data, the `TransactionSet` message MUST contain the original `LC` value as `LC_req`, a new `LC` value indicating the highest LC value from the peer and the `token` value from the `State` message.

#### 4.2.3 Transaction List Query

For every `TransactionSet` message a node receives, it MUST check the `token` value in the message and compare it to its own administration.
If the `token` doesn't exist or if the `LC_req` value doesn't match, the node MUST ignore the message.

> The IBLT in the `TransactionSet` message contains every transaction of the peer in the LC range of `0-LC_req`. The node MUST lookup/compute the IBLT for this range and subtract it from the IBLT of the peer. Decoding the resulting IBLT will list the transaction refs the peer has and the local node misses. 

Reviewer 2: The IBLT received covers the range `0-min(LC, LC_req)`
if `LC < LC_req` we only need to compare to our own IBLT with range `0-LC`. If the LCs are far apart it will not be possible to decode the subtracted IBLTs.

These transactions MUST be queried by using the `TransactionListQuery` message. It contains all missing transaction references.
The message MUST contain a `token` that is to be used in the response.

> If the decoding fails, the local node sends a new `State` message. The `LC` value MUST be the `end` of the page before the page that included `LC_req`. 

Reviewer 2: The new `LC` in `State` can be one page lower than the page containing min(`LC`, `LC_req`) from the `TransactionSet`

   * When different:
      * Remove all known transaction references from the list.
      * Request the remaining transactions.
      * If the remaining list is empty and the LC value is equal or higher than Bob's highest LC value, Bob sends a `State` message as defined in Chapter 6. 

3. Alice responds with the requested transactions (§5.2.3).

4. After adding Alice's transactions to the DAG (making sure its cryptographic signature is valid), Bob SHOULD query the payload if it's missing.

A node MUST make sure to only add transactions of which all previous transactions are present. If previous transactions are missing, Bob will send a `State` message.

#### 5.2.1 Broadcasting new transactions

A node's new transaction references MUST be broadcast at an interval using the `Gossip` message, by default every 2 seconds. The interval MAY be adjusted by the node operator but MUST conform to the limits (min/max interval) defined by the network. It is advised to keep it relatively short because it directly influences the speed by which new transactions are retrieved.

The `Gossip` message MUST contain an `XOR` value, an `LC` value and a list of transaction references (`transactions`).

> The list MUST contain all new transaction references since the last `Gossip` message.

Author: Could be interpreted as: your own new TXs not added to the DAG. I'll clarify

> The list of transaction references MUST be tracked per connection.

Reviewer 2: What is the purpose of this requirement? It sounds like an implementation detail.
```suggestion
```

Author: To make clear that you have to do this per connection. If all nodes do not do this, the gossip part will fail. We could change it to SHOULD to make it less strict.

If no new transactions have been added/received or for the first message for a connection, an empty list is sent.
The list MUST not contain more than 100 transactions.
This could create a backlog of messages at the sending node's side. 

> A node SHOULD take precautions on keeping this backlog below maximum, eg it SHOULD reduce the inflow of new transactions.

Author: That will have different consequences in different situations. You can't prefer your own TXs since they might depend on others previous transactions. It's also a SHOULD, not a MUST so it's up to the implementing party.

A restriction on inflow could be to pause requesting TXs from other nodes to give way to own TXs. If that is too much as well, a restriction on the API should occur. Also a buffer could be added in between allowing for some bursts of TXs. Then later when things cool down, messaging can catch up.

> A node SHOULD take precautions on keeping this backlog below maximum, eg it SHOULD reduce the inflow of new transactions.

Reviewer 2: Restricting a node's intake of new Txs could cause the node to fall behind and potentially never catch up with the rest of the network. This could introduce a delay in authorization of access to patient data. I would prefer to reduce the interval for gossip messages in this situation.

The current requirements also forces all nodes, including 'spectators', to be an active participant in distribution of information. Generally speaking this is a good thing, but it might not be feasible for all to do so.

The exact gossip message probably requires some more thought. I prefer the message to have a minimal set of requirements so the exact form can be adapted when we learn more. I think the gossip messages should be more of the broadcast and forget type. It doesn't feel right that this has any impact on how/if the node accepts/creates new Txs.

> The list MUST not contain more than 100 transactions.
> This could create a backlog of messages at the sending node's side. 
> A node SHOULD take precautions on keeping this backlog below maximum, eg it SHOULD reduce the inflow of new transactions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The list MUST not contain more than 100 transactions.
This could create a backlog of messages at the sending node's side. 
A node SHOULD take precautions to keep this backlog to a minimum.
```

The `LC` value MUST equal the highest Lamport Clock value of all transaction references included in the `XOR` calculation.
If no transactions are present, an all-zero `XOR` and `LC` of 0 is sent.

This message does not require a `conversationID`

#### 5.2.2 Transaction List Query

Upon receiving a `Gossip` message from a peer, a node MUST first compare the `XOR` value from the message with its own `XOR` value from the DAG.
If the values are equal, no further action is required.

If they are not equal, the transaction list MUST be filtered. All known transaction references MUST be removed.
The resulting list contains all transaction the node is missing.
The node MUST send a `TransactionListQuery` message containing the list of missing transaction references.
This message MUST also add a new `conversationID`.

If the resulting list of transactions is empty and the `LC` value in the message is equal to or higher than the highest Lamport Clock value of the node, then the node MUST send a `State` message. See §6.2.1.

> #### 5.2.3 Transaction List

Author: Last line of §5.2: 

```
A node MUST make sure to only add transactions of which all previous transactions are present. If previous transactions are missing, Bob will send a `State` message.
```

When a node receives a `TransactionListQuery` message, it MUST respond with a `TransactionList` message.
This is a response type message so it MUST include the sent `conversationID`.
Transactions that resulted from a `TransactionListQuery` MUST have been present in that message.
Unknown transactions references SHOULD be ignored.
Transactions that resulted from a `TransactionRangeQuery` MUST have an LC value that is within the requested range.
If any of these requirements are not met, the entire message MUST be ignored.

> A `TransactionList` message MAY be broken up into smaller messages, each message should confirm to these rules. Each part MUST also use the same `conversationID`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A `TransactionList` message MAY be broken up into smaller messages, each message should conform to these rules. Each part MUST also use the same `conversationID`.
```

These transactions MUST be queried by using the `TransactionListQuery` message (see §5.2.2). 

If the decoding fails, the local node sends a new `State` message. 
The IBLT subtraction used the range `0-min(LC, LC_req)`.
The new request MUST be for one page lower.
The `LC` value MUST be the `end` of that previous page. 
The `XOR` value MUST be calculated over the transaction references in the range starting with 0 and ending with the new `LC` value.

#### 6.2.4 Transaction Range Query

If the IBLT from a `TransactionSet` message can be decoded, the local node MAY also send a `TransactionRangeQuery` message.
This is only needed if the page containing the `LC` value of the `TransactionSet` message comes after the page containing `LC_req`. 
This means the peer has additional transactions outside the IBLT range.
If the `LC_req` value is in the latest page of the local node, it SHOULD query all pages leading up to the `LC` value.
If the `LC_req` value is NOT in the latest page of the local node, then it MUST only query the next page.

> This last requirement prevents a node from querying the entire DAG while only some historic transactions are missing.

Reviewer 2: And solves the case where there is a collision on a page.

Author: added that too

1. Resolve peer's node DID to its corresponding DID document.
2. Assert that one of the `NutsComm` endpoint's host matches (one of) the `dNSName` SANs in the peer's TLS client certificate.

## 4. Conversations

Certain messages in the protocol are a response to a certain request. To make sure a response corresponds to a certain request, a `conversationID` is added to the request. Response type messages MUST add the same `conversationID` in the response.
The `conversationID` is scoped to a connection.

> A node is free to choose the form of a `conversationID`.

Reviewer: I'd say it MUST be unique? Or unique enough, so that for at least the validity period there are no duplicates?

To avoid implementations using a hardcoded string (or counting 0-9 and then rolling over).

> It MUST be valid for at least 10 seconds and no longer than 30 seconds.

Reviewer: is this long enough for longer IBLT interactions?

Author: Each `State` is a new conversation.

> If a node receives a response with a `conversationID`, it MUST match its contents with the original request.

Reviewer: Conversation IDs are bound to a specific connection/peer?

Author: as stated by line 60

A node MUST make sure to only add transactions of which all previous transactions are present. If previous transactions are missing, Bob will send a `State` message.

#### 5.2.1 Broadcasting new transactions

A node's new transaction references MUST be broadcast at an interval using the `Gossip` message, by default every 2 seconds. The interval MAY be adjusted by the node operator but MUST conform to the limits (min/max interval) defined by the network. It is advised to keep it relatively short because it directly influences the speed by which new transactions are retrieved.

The `Gossip` message MUST contain an `XOR` value, an `LC` value and a list of transaction references (`transactions`).
The list MUST contain all new transaction references since the last `Gossip` message.
The list of transaction references MUST be tracked per connection.
If no new transactions have been added/received or for the first message for a connection, an empty list is sent.
The list MUST not contain more than 100 transactions.
This could create a backlog of messages at the sending node's side. 

> A node SHOULD take precautions on keeping this backlog to a minimum, eg it SHOULD reduce the inflow of new transactions.

Reviewer: If the purpose of reducing the inflow is to keep the gossip protocol working, I'd say the functioning of the gossip protocol is less important than the inflow of transactions. So let the transactions come, but either skip some for the gossip protocol (let it be handled by the IBLT) or just keep sending them while respecting the limits of the network. You'll get 100 TXs every 2 seconds, so 3000 per minute. That's a lot of new TXs.

Yes, the creation of new TXs should be limited/throttled and the TX format should allow for batches for those cases its justified (e.g. new vendor publishing many, many private VCs).

Author: I'll rephrase it to keep the backlog below maximum. Because with more than 100TX per 2 seconds, it'll switch to a slower mechanism which will perform even less!

The `LC` value MUST equal the highest Lamport Clock value of all transaction references included in the `XOR` calculation.
If no transactions are present, an all-zero `XOR` and `LC` of 0 is sent.

This message does not require a `conversationID`

#### 5.2.2 Transaction List Query

Upon receiving a `Gossip` message from a peer, a node MUST first compare the `XOR` value from the message with its own `XOR` value from the DAG.
If the values are equal, no further action is required.

If they are not equal, the transaction list MUST be filtered. All known transaction references MUST be removed.
The resulting list contains all transaction the node is missing.
The node MUST send a `TransactionListQuery` message containing the list of missing transaction references.

> This message MUST also add a `conversationID`.

Reviewer: The `Gossip` message lacks the `conversationID`, so you can't add it here?

Author: It's created here. A `TransactionListQuery` is the beginning of the conversation.

If the resulting list of transactions is empty and the `LC` value in the message is equal to or higher than the highest Lamport Clock value of the node, then the node MUST send a `State` message. See §6.2.1.

#### 5.2.3 Transaction List

When a node receives a `TransactionListQuery` message, it MUST respond with a `TransactionList` message.
This is a response type message so it MUST include the sent `conversationID`.

> Each transaction in the message MUST have been requested. Transactions that resulted from a `TransactionListQuery` MUST have been present in that message.

Reviewer: stating the same thing twice, in other wording? Better write it once, but then in such a way it doesn't require a second wording.

Unknown transactions references SHOULD be ignored.
Transactions that resulted from a `TransactionRangeQuery` MUST have an LC value that is within the requested range.
When a `TransactionList` message is received and this is not true, the entire message MUST be ignored.

A `TransactionList` message MAY be broken up into smaller messages, each message should confirm to these rules. Each part MUST also use the same `conversationID`.
All transactions in the `TransactionList` message MUST be sorted by LC value (lowest first).

#### 5.2.4 Transaction Payload query

depends on private tx chaptr

## 6. Set reconciliation protocol

One of the problems in a distributed network is how to make sure every node has processed all transactions.
When two nodes haven't processed the same set of transactions, the second problem is how to efficiently synchronize the missing transactions.
The higher the efficiency, the more transactions the entire network can process.

> This part of the protocol is used to synchronize transactions that are missed by the gossip protocol. 

Reviewer: (e.g. due to nodes being offline/network partitions)

### 6.1 Data requirements

The protocol requires an XOR value and IBLT structure to be sent in a message.

> The XOR value has already ben explained in §5.1.1.

Reviewer: been

When this happens randomly, it wouldn't be such a problem, but it's also an attack vector.
An attacker could craft pairs of transactions that would trigger other nodes into requesting large amounts of transactions. 
This type of attack is called the [birthday attack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birthday_attack).
The only way to protect against this type of attack is to make the set large enough that the cost to the attacker would become to high.
For an IBLT with 64 buckets and 4 hashes, the chance for a collision is 50% after adding ~5000 keys.
This would be trivial for current computers.
Expanding this to 1024 buckets and 6 hashes, reaching a 50% chance for a collision is only achieved after adding more than a billion keys.
This is still not much, but the keys used for the collision have to be created by real signed transactions.
Even on modern hardware, this could take an hour.

### A.2 The right message for the right situation

The protocol uses a variety of message to synchronize all transactions over nodes.
Together they cover all known situations.

If all nodes are operating correctly, the gossip protocol is the most efficient in synchronizing all the transactions.

> It will not be able to deal with situations where a node is offline or when nodes can no longer reach each other.

Reviewer: where a node _was_ offline (or has been)

> It can be used frequent and uses small messages.

Reviewer: frequently because it uses small messages

If a node has been offline for some time, the combination of an IBLT and a range query will synchronize the node efficiently.

> The IBLT will resolve all missing transactions for the node's latest page and the range query will sycnhronize all the missing pages. Those pages will include all transactions that have been created during the period the nodes was offline.

Reviewer: sycnhronize  -> synchronize

> The IBLT will resolve all missing transactions for the node's latest page and the range query will sycnhronize all the missing pages. Those pages will include all transactions that have been created during the period the nodes was offline.

Reviewer: nodes -> node

> If a node has not been offline, but its communication has been interrupted, it will have created new transactions.

Reviewer: _might_ have created new transactions that aren't synchronized with the rest of the network

> If a node has not been offline, but its communication has been interrupted, it will have created new transactions.

Reviewer: although one could argue that "communication interruption" is a form of being offline (its all about perspective)

The Lamport Clock values will overlap with the transactions of the rest of the network.
The IBLT will be able to determine missing transactions. 

> If the difference in transactions is to big, the protocol will reduce the range the IBLT covers until an IBLT has been found that can resolve the transaction set difference.

Reviewer: is too great
